Me? Yes. Monterrey. Monterrey in the city? Yes.
In what year? I don't
know. It was 1897.
Yes, I have it, but I don't remember. Yes, and what
year did you come to the United States? What year?
Yes. Well, here in this place we came in 1921, about
half a year ago, as they say, to speak Spanish. Yes.
No, my husband was older. What? No. He was 16,
wasn't
he? I think so. Yes. For what reason?
Well, tell me a little about your mother and
father. What is your father's name? His name is
Martín. Martín Cancha. Yes. And his mother,
Micaela. Yes, she was a very, very kind woman with a
very, very big heart, with a lot of friendship and
love for everyone. I remember her very well. She
was a very charming person. And how many children
did she
have? How many children did Micaela have? We have
five. Three men and two women. And you
live in Monterrey? And you lived in Monterrey
during these last years? Well, I didn't know
Monterrey. I was very young. My parents came here,
near Rio Grande, to the other side of Mexico. Ah,
yes. In Nuevo León. Yes? In what town? Well, in
Nuevo León, but in Tamaulipas, where we came from.
I came here to live there.
I don't know anything about Tamaulipas. No? I was
born there, but I don't know anything. Because I
was very young. My parents came here to live in the
river, to use the word. Yes. In Tamaulipas. I grew
up there.
Y todos nacieron en México, los hermanos,
¿verdad? Sí. ¿Y qué clase de trabajo tenía su papá?
Él trabajaba en la agricultura, en la labor. Sí. Él
trajo de... ¿Contieres propios? ¿Contieres de
suyo o de otra persona? De otras personas. Well,
she went to the
center.
Do you want some coffee? Do you want a cup of coffee?
A cup of coffee? Yes, it's here. Oh, do you already
have coffee? Yes, I don't have it right now, it's
for you. I'll just have a little drink, it's a lot.
Put it on the table,
please. Yes. Well, tell me, perhaps, please, a few
things about your childhood. Did you go to school?
Very little. Very little. I didn't go to school
because it hurt me. I lost an eye since I was a baby. I
had a bad eye. It hasn't been long since I lost it
here on this ranch. What's the name of that ranch?
What? The ranch, what's it called? Here? No, no, in
Mexico, in Nuevo León. Oh, it didn't have a name,
Rancho Chiquito. Rancho Chiquito? I mean, it
didn't have a name. The village was close to the
town. There was a little house there. But it wasn't
a big ranch that had names. But it was close to what
town? It was a town called General Treviño.
General Treviño, this town. It was close to this
town. And did you also work with your father? I was
very young. I hardly worked. I was very young at
that time. He died in 1911. He died very late. Did
his father die there in Monterrey? He died there
because he went to purify himself there and his
people stayed there, where he was from. They lived
here in the town of Treviño. He got very sick and
went to purify himself there. She died here in
Monterrey.
Yes. And he never came to the United States. Huh? He
never came to the United States. Your father. Oh,
no. No. He died there in Mexico. He didn't. Yes. But
your mother? She died here. Here? Yes. Here in
Robestown. Well, not here, but... Robestown had
some relatives, daughters of a sister of mine. She
got a little sick and she took her father to the
hospital. Then Robestown died. After her father
died, what does her mother do with five children?
She works in the houses with the ladies. They had a
little bit of money, they gave them a little bit of
work, they gave them a little bit of money. Yes. And
in the ranch, or where? No, in the town. In the town
in Mexico. Yes. Yes. And then, in what year did your
family come here to Texas? I think it was the 16th.
In the year 16. For what reason did you come to your
family to
Texas?
To work a little to earn some food.
Yes. Was the work better here or not? What? Was the
work better here? Yes. There
is more work here than... Yes. In what way do you
understand that there is good work
here? We work in labor. Yes. Well,
wasn't it for the reason of the revolution?
Revolution of... Is it here? No, it's already in
Mexico. In these years there is a revolution,
right? Oh, yes. I remember it was already a little
big. Yes. The revolution came in 2010, 2014. Yes.
When there was a lot of revolution in Mexico in
those years. Ah. Tell me about the revolution,
please. No, I can't tell you because I was very
young. Yes. It didn't stay in my mind. Yes, but what
does your mother say about these things?
I can't tell you what she said. No? I don't
remember. No?
¿Estaba un problema en su pueblo? ¿Hay soldados o
otras cosas como esto? Venían soldados así nomás,
eran pueblos chiquitos, nomás andaban así en los
pueblos ellos. Sí. Venían de los pueblos grandes
de México.
Bueno. When you came to the United States, what
kind of work was there for your mother? She only
worked at home. She didn't work here. Only at home.
And you? We worked in the lab.
Here in Robstown or somewhere else? Here in this
place, because we've been here all the time since
we came from Mexico.
Yes. Do
you want
more coffee? No. No? No. And
did you visit Mexico after you left? Do you know
Mexico in these past years? When I was there, I
didn't want to go back. When we came here, I didn't
want to go back.
No, never? And were you married? No. No, never? I
never got married. I never got married. And
your siblings? Siblings? Yes. The two siblings of
a man have already died. Yes. I have two sisters,
two sisters are women. Yes. One lives in Lobos and
the other lives in Austin. Yes. And they were
married? Yes, they were married. Yes? They were
married. Here in Texas?
Yes. Well, when you lived in Mexico, what kind of
house did you have? Tell me about your house in
Mexico. Oh, no. to the poor, not a good
big house. And it was made
of what kind of material? Material, a material
that in Mexico is that they take out of the sky some
stones that they call, what do they call it? Yes.
Yes, some blocks that they take out, they compose
them. They take them out of the land and put them
in
houses. Was life very different there? Was life
very different there? Oh, yes. Yes? In what way?
There wasn't much work. No? For the people. Poor
people. There was work, but...
They liked to come back here, to this
side. Yes. And what do you pay in Mexico? A lot of
money or little? In those days they paid a little.
Now they pay more. According to what people say.
And when you came
here to the United States, how did you come? By car
or by train or what? By train. By train? Tell me a
little about the trip. Tell me the story of this
trip. No, I don't have much to talk about. No? I
don't have much to talk about. Because I don't have
much on my mind. I don't have much to talk about.
Yes.
Well...
The weather is very rainy, yes.
Oh, yes. Yes. It looks like it's going
to rain all day, who knows. Yes.
But now, it rained a lot for about three weeks. Yes.
Now it's a little sunny. Yes. It's
very beautiful
here. Yes. Well, what's your name again? What's
your name again? What's your name again? Yes, you.
Me? Yes. Eugenio. Eugenio. Eugenio Sánchez.
Eugenio Sánchez.
And you lived here for almost your whole life? Oh,
yes. Yes. And you like
it here? Yes. And now? You don't look at anything
anymore? No. Sitting here. Well,
thank you very much.